dictionary.md, before:

# Action
Conscious and willful [transformation] achieved by the [actor] unto the [world].

[action]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#action
[act]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#action


# Actor
[Social] [entity] that holds [agency] and that can [act] unto the [world].

[actor]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#actor


# Agency

[agency]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#agency


# Aspirations
A [desired] state of [personal], [collective], or [societal] [cofiguration]. [Ideal] [social] or [material] situations that [motivate] the [actor] to [act]. **Aspirations** may be for the [self] or [projected] the [other]. **Aspirations** may be complementary, contradictory, combined, alternatives, or neutral to one another. With [affordances] and [capabilities], **aspirations** define [agency].

[aspiration]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#aspirations
[aspirations]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#aspirations


# Affordances
[social] or [material] [configurations] that allow the [actor] to [actualize] their [aspirations]. [Actual] or [virtual] [situations] [used] to [act]. **Affordances** may be simple, multiple, positive, or negative. With [aspirations] and [capabilities], **affordances define [agency].

*Affordances* can be used, blocked or...

[affordance]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#affordances
[affordances]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#affordances


# Capabilities
[Embodied] or [extended] [capital] that the [actor] [develops]. [Personal] or [collective] aptitudes that enable the action to [act] on [affordances] in order to [actualize] [aspirations]. With [aspirations] and [affordances], **capabilities** define [agency].

[capability]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#capabilities
[capabilities]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#capabilities


# Cognitive affordance
Type of [affordance] which the [actor] [produce] through a [cognitive process] and which [locate] within the actor’s [cognitive capital].

[cognitive affordance]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#cognitive_affordance


# Collective


# Conception
The [actor]’s [cognitive] process by which they model the world

[conception]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#conception
[conceive]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#conception
[conceives]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#conception


# Entity 

[entity]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#entity


# Ideal


# Invite
An [affordance] [conceived] by the [actor] for an [other] as part of a [projection]. The *invite* does not correspond to the other’s own set of [actual] or [virtual] affordance and does not necessarily corresponds to one of their [aspiration]. Therefore, an *invite* differs from a [virtual_affordance]. Instead, the *invite* corresponds to what the actor believes to be the other’s aspiration, or what they want for this other.

[invite]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#invite
[invites]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#invite


# Material
Dimension of the [world] by opposition to the [social], of a [reality] that is characterized by its [sensorial] tangibility. **Material** realities [exist] to the [actor] on their own prior to [constructs].

[material]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#material
[materiality]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#material


# Motivation

[motivation]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#motivation
[motivate]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#motivation


# Objection
[act] performed by an [actor] to limit the [capability] of the [other]. As an act, the *objection* results from the [actualization] of the actor’s [aspiration] and implies the use of [affordances] through their [capabilities]. 


# Obstacle
[Social] or [material] entity that prevents the [actor] of using their [capability] on an [affordance].

# Personal

# Projection
[Cognitive process] by which and [actor] attributes [components] of their [agency] to one [other]. [aspirations], [affordances] and [capabilities] can all be *projected*. A *projection* can result from an actor’s [aspiration] to [transform] the other or lack of [empathy]. It can also result from the [aspiration] to train their [capability] in [actualizing] an [aspirable].


# Cognitive_capital
The entire set of [cognitive_affordance] and [capabilities] of an [actor], which they can use.


# Cognitive_affordance
Type of [affordance] that correspond to the [knowledge] of the [actor]. With [capabilities], **cognitive affordances** form the [cognitive_capital] of the [actor]. 


# Aspirable
What the [actor] conceives as an [aspiration] but to which they do not aspirate themselve. An *aspirable* usually results from a [projection] and therefore differs from a [virtual_aspiration] by implying the [other].


# Transformation
Process by which an [actor] actualizes their [aspiration] and therefore [act] unto the [world].

[transformation]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#transformation


# Other
[social] [entity] [conceive] d by the [actor] as having [agency] and thus capable of [acting] unto the [world].

[other]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#other


# Situation

Given [configuration] of [affordances] known to the [actor].


# Social
Dimension of the [world] by opposition to the [material], of a [reality] that is characterized by its [social] [meaning]. **Social** realities [exist] to the [actor] as a result of [socialization].

[social]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#social


# Socialization
Process by which [information] is exchanged between [actors], and by which [realities] acquire a [social] [meaning].

[socialization]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#socialization


# Societal


# Virtual aspiration
State of an [aspiration] that has not been achieved. A **virtual_aspiration** is one of two stages of an aspiration with [actual aspiration].

[virtual aspiration]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#virtual_aspiration


# Virtual affordance
The state of an [affordance] that the [actor] could as [actualize] to achieve an [aspiration] but that is not [use] at the present moment.

[virtual affordance]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#virtual_affordance


# World
[world]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#world

[agency]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md[agency]

Commit message:

Adding entry for Public Space

dictionary.md, after:

# Action
Conscious and willful [transformation] achieved by the [actor] unto the [world].

[action]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#action
[act]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#action


# Actor
[Social] [entity] that holds [agency] and that can [act] unto the [world].

[actor]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#actor


# Agency

[agency]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#agency


# Aspirations
A [desired] state of [personal], [collective], or [societal] [cofiguration]. [Ideal] [social] or [material] situations that [motivate] the [actor] to [act]. **Aspirations** may be for the [self] or [projected] the [other]. **Aspirations** may be complementary, contradictory, combined, alternatives, or neutral to one another. With [affordances] and [capabilities], **aspirations** define [agency].

[aspiration]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#aspirations
[aspirations]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#aspirations


# Affordances
[social] or [material] [configurations] that allow the [actor] to [actualize] their [aspirations]. [Actual] or [virtual] [situations] [used] to [act]. **Affordances** may be simple, multiple, positive, or negative. With [aspirations] and [capabilities], **affordances define [agency].

*Affordances* can be used, blocked or...

[affordance]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#affordances
[affordances]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#affordances


# Capabilities
[Embodied] or [extended] [capital] that the [actor] [develops]. [Personal] or [collective] aptitudes that enable the action to [act] on [affordances] in order to [actualize] [aspirations]. With [aspirations] and [affordances], **capabilities** define [agency].

[capability]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#capabilities
[capabilities]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#capabilities


# Cognitive affordance
Type of [affordance] which the [actor] [produce] through a [cognitive process] and which [locate] within the actor’s [cognitive capital].

[cognitive affordance]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#cognitive_affordance


# Collective


# Conception
The [actor]’s [cognitive] process by which they model the world

[conception]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#conception
[conceive]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#conception
[conceives]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#conception


# Entity 

[entity]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#entity


# Ideal


# Invite
An [affordance] [conceived] by the [actor] for an [other] as part of a [projection]. The *invite* does not correspond to the other’s own set of [actual] or [virtual] affordance and does not necessarily corresponds to one of their [aspiration]. Therefore, an *invite* differs from a [virtual_affordance]. Instead, the *invite* corresponds to what the actor believes to be the other’s aspiration, or what they want for this other.

[invite]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#invite
[invites]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#invite


# Material
Dimension of the [world] by opposition to the [social], of a [reality] that is characterized by its [sensorial] tangibility. **Material** realities [exist] to the [actor] on their own prior to [constructs].

[material]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#material
[materiality]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#material


# Motivation

[motivation]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#motivation
[motivate]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#motivation


# Objection
[act] performed by an [actor] to limit the [capability] of the [other]. As an act, the *objection* results from the [actualization] of the actor’s [aspiration] and implies the use of [affordances] through their [capabilities]. 


# Obstacle
[Social] or [material] entity that prevents the [actor] of using their [capability] on an [affordance].

# Personal

# Projection
[Cognitive process] by which and [actor] attributes [components] of their [agency] to one [other]. [aspirations], [affordances] and [capabilities] can all be *projected*. A *projection* can result from an actor’s [aspiration] to [transform] the other or lack of [empathy]. It can also result from the [aspiration] to train their [capability] in [actualizing] an [aspirable].


# Public_space
Collective process by which [actors] [actualize] their individual [aspirations].


# Cognitive_capital
The entire set of [cognitive_affordance] and [capabilities] of an [actor], which they can use.


# Cognitive_affordance
Type of [affordance] that correspond to the [knowledge] of the [actor]. With [capabilities], **cognitive affordances** form the [cognitive_capital] of the [actor]. 


# Aspirable
What the [actor] conceives as an [aspiration] but to which they do not aspirate themselve. An *aspirable* usually results from a [projection] and therefore differs from a [virtual_aspiration] by implying the [other].


# Transformation
Process by which an [actor] actualizes their [aspiration] and therefore [act] unto the [world].

[transformation]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#transformation


# Other
[social] [entity] [conceive] d by the [actor] as having [agency] and thus capable of [acting] unto the [world].

[other]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#other


# Situation

Given [configuration] of [affordances] known to the [actor].


# Social
Dimension of the [world] by opposition to the [material], of a [reality] that is characterized by its [social] [meaning]. **Social** realities [exist] to the [actor] as a result of [socialization].

[social]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#social


# Socialization
Process by which [information] is exchanged between [actors], and by which [realities] acquire a [social] [meaning].

[socialization]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#socialization


# Societal


# Virtual aspiration
State of an [aspiration] that has not been achieved. A **virtual_aspiration** is one of two stages of an aspiration with [actual aspiration].

[virtual aspiration]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#virtual_aspiration


# Virtual affordance
The state of an [affordance] that the [actor] could as [actualize] to achieve an [aspiration] but that is not [use] at the present moment.

[virtual affordance]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#virtual_affordance


# World
[world]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md#world

[agency]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/dictionary.md[agency]
