manuscript/chapter04.md, before:

***Rough draft — do not cite, do not share***


# Components of the model

This chapter present the conceptual components of the ethics model:
* Aspirations
* Affordances
* Capabilities

I find that in this model, the three notions should be conceived as something that resides within the individual. Aspirations, Affordances and Capabilities I define here only exist in the mind of the individual. Of course, it is possible to discuss and share those with others, but these are of different nature that those I explain below. For example, one could suggest an aspiration or an affordance to someone, but if this second person does not see it as an their own aspiration or affordance, they simply are not. This raises the question on how we can study or event discuss such matters, since they only exist within the self. In the sense, this raises the same question as to the colour or the odour of things. How we know if what we see as blue is the same as what others see as blue? Empathy, again, might be the key. Based on a shared personal experience, we can associate one explanation of aspirations, affordance and capabilities. Those share personal experience also serve in fact to create a bound between individuals. Because we conceive aspirations, affordances and capabilities to be something we can have in common, we become one with others. This could explain why it is easier to “relate” to people with whom we “share” aspirations, even if this does not mean that this person will provide us in any way with an (social) affordance. At least, we can “relate”. Likewise, we relate to those with whom we share capabilities, even though they might be our “competitors”, and we relate with those with whom we share affordances. The sharing of affordances can also introduce competition if these are perceived as resources (affordances that are limited in usage) or cooperation if these are commons (affordances which need maintenance). **The model therefore also not only explains agency, be also how we build social relatedness.**

The **capability** to relate is however honed over time, like **empathy**, **care** and **solicitude**. While these are honed, they are also triggered by **aspirations** and **affordances**. In fact, the **capability** to care fosters **aspiration** for the wellbeing of others, or vice-versa. The model builds on this iterative process between the three components. Hence, the **capability** to care for other will foster the **invention** of **affordances**  to actualise the **aspiration** for their wellbeing, just as the latter will depend on the availability of **affordances** and our **capability** to invent or find those **affordances** in our **environment**.




***

# Aspirations
Aspirations is a universal concept that describes a human reality: desire. From the moment we are born, we desire. The desire not to be exposed to light, the desire for warmth, the desire for food. Of course, only later can we begin conceptualizing, discerning and naming these desires, but this do not mean they do not exist from the moment we come into this world.

With time, our desire multiplies. We start wanting to be held, to be talked to, and to move things. Soon, we want affection, we crave certain food, we want to play with our toys. As we grow older, these aspirations become more abstract, like going to college, traveling, meeting the right person, etc.

While many of our aspirations concerns us, we also desire things for others. We desire our parents to be in good health and that friend to get the job they applied for. Aspirations can, in that sense, be selfless. The people we aspire for can be individuals but also groups. Hence, I can aspire for my students to suceed and find good jobs. I might project these aspirations unto them individually, in accordance to my relationship with each and everyone of them, but I also project these aspiration unto them as a group. Hence, the type of group can be more or less defined. For example, a given group of students is defined, while all students I have is slightly more abstract. I might want for all students — regardless if taught them or not — to succeed. 

While our feeling of desire might be bigger for ourselves and those we love, we also aspire the best for strangers... specific conflicts, society, etc.

Our desire may even apply to non-humans such as pet, or wild life, flora, and the environement. 

In general, aspirations follow two evolutionary paths: one concerns the distance to the self, and the second the degree of abstraction. In [Table 1], I give four examples that illustrate the range of aspirations from basic to abtract and from personal to distant. Unsurprisingly, basic aspirations correspond to those that we develop at an early stage in our life. These also correspond to the “basic needs” such as eating, clothing and shelter. The most basic personal aspirations are somewhat universal. On the other hand, aspirations for distant entities and abstract aspirations vary greatly from one individual to another. 

### Table 1: Aspiration matrix
|          | Basic               | Abstract        |
|----------|---------------------|-----------------|
| Personal | Drinking water      | Going to heaven |
| Distant  | No animal suffering | Sustainability  |

[Table 1]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/manuscript/chapter04.md###chapter04-table01

The distinction between “aspirations”, “desires” and “wants” may seem thin, and it is. The reason why I use aspirations has to do with the seemingly more abstract nature of the notion. We often associate “desire” with a feeling or an uncontrolable urge. Wants are often opposed to needs, making them seem unecessary, superflous or frivolous. Aspiration, on the contrary are associated with greater ideals and with distant future, which may seem odd to speak of a baby’s aspiration to drink their mothers’ milk. Yet, as we will see, a basic and immediate desire and a greater abstract goal can be put on the same level of importance in given circumstances. Moreover, I argue–and this is one of the main point of this book—that we define distant and abstract aspirations through the same process than we define basic and personal ones: by our capabilities on perceived affordances.

## Where aspirations and desire split
Aspirations can be based on desire, but not only. They can also be based on obligation or constraint. For example, one may aspire to a certain status by sense of obligation, or indirectly to fulfil the aspiration of pleasing one’s parents, itself pushed by the aspiration to avoid conflict or feel secure.

The question of conflict should be discussed in details, especially in the context of urban life and governance. What is conflict in the framework of this model? **Conflict**, which should be an integral part of the model, as it is core to ethic. It would seem logic to say that conflict emerges when aspirations differs, when people want different things. But in fact conflict can also emerge when aspirations align. This could be case when capabilities and affordances are not shared, and that the “way” to actualised shared aspirations differs. In fact, most political issues arise not from sharing different aspirations, but honing different capabilities and inventing different affordances. Conflict can also be part of an **aspiration** actualisation process, and therefore embedded in agency. For example, creating conflict between parties can in fact produce affordances needed to actualise one aspirations. Yet, conflict may also emerge when a party does not have the capability to use or invent affordances in the **virtual** **conditions** that would result from the foreseen actualisation of the other’s **perceived** aspirations. In this case, **conflict** would serve to maintain **virtual** **conditions** for this the party can use its **capabilities** and **affordances** to actualise its **aspirations**.

What would be the difference between **aspirations** and **objectives**? Considering what I said about **conflict**, objectives are shared ensemble of **aspirations**, **affordances** and **capabilities**. They need to be shared to make sense, and this sharing entails a degree of **empathy** on each other‘s capabilities and affordances needed to reach these aspirations.


One‘s aspiration cannot be “in conflict” per see. However, the actualisation of certain aspirations may limit the invention of affordances or the honing of capabilities for another aspiration. Hence, when we feel that two or more of our aspirations are “in conflict”, we foresee that the actualisation of one generates **conditions** that **limit** the actualisation of the other. 

What does it mean to **limit** the actualisation of an aspiration?


***

## Aspirations are linked
One aspiration may lead to another. If I want to be successful, it might push me to want to make money, therefore have a good job, therefore go to university. Yet, I might also, instead of wanting to have a job, want to make a lot of money without going to university. 

## Building on aspirations
Aspirations can also be built from the bottom up.

## Introducing discrimination
The example of students is a good one because it allows me to introduce some bias. I might want all my students to succeed or all students to suceed, or I may think that only hard-working students should succeed. Instead, I could also aspire for all hard-working and naturally talented students to succeed. Why should students who are naturally gifted and do not have to work hard should fail?

Any aspiration discreminates. When I want something for myself, I want it for me, not for others. If I want something good to happen to my family or to some friends, I don’t wish it necessarily as muhc for other people. I may want the same for everybody, but let‘s just say I don’t care as much. Inversely, I may want something for strangers, but not necessarilly for people that I know. I may consider they don’t deserve it, or that it is no use to them.

## Priorizing aspirations
Not all aspirations are equal. We consider some aspiration of greater importance. Succeeding in life may seem to us more important than going for a burger. 

## Priority is contextual
We may favor one aspiration — say eating something when I am hungry — over another like going for a hike, even though I also want to hike. The way we prioritze aspirations is not absolute, but has to do with context. We would priorize our aspiration to eat if we are starving, over something we deem of greater importance like being true to a friend. Yet, we sometime face these situation where little things take a disproportionate size, as we say. 

## Aspirations depend on context
Let’s say I walk down the street. If the street happens to be by the parc, I may want to stroll thorugh the automn leaves. If on the street there is a store that caugh my eye, I might enter inside and buy something, something I had never thought of.  

## Modeling aspirations
Aspirations are virtual realities.

## Morality / Normative Ethics
Morality is the collectively defined hierarchy of aspirations. Morality help us navigate our aspirations, it’s to get rid of the need to think for ourselves. Hedonism tells us we have to prioritze our bodily aspirations. Utilitarism tells us to prioritize the many aspirations of the most people as possible.

## Guilt
When we go against this priority


***

# Affordances

Affordances allow us to actualise our aspirations by providing us with *material* (physical and ideal) that "does the job"?

To understand the relationship between aspiration and affordances, I might want to to observe practices. For example, if I am wearing a sanitary mask in public, it is to fill several aspirations: protect myself from contamination, obey social norm, conform to a practice that I deem valid. By opposition, I would not want to wear a plexiglas mask because I think it looks stupid, and it would make me stand out in public. Also, I am not sure of their efficiency. Therefore, the sanitary mask allow me to actualise these aspirations, as well as my aspiration to go out and, for example, my aspiration to go buy something. 


The quality of an affordance results of this “trade off” between various aspirations that, in a sense, even define the affordance.

Affordance need to be defined, first by being perceived. In fact, the perception of an affordance is rather its “invention” the same way we “invent” a treasure in French law. The affordance only exist at the moment it is conceived by its user.

Can affordances be perceived by many? Well, since all individuals have different sets of aspirations, the affordance itself may not be perceived collectively but it is possible to recognise that an artefact or a person represents an affordance for some one else. This relates to out capacity for **empathy**, that is to **project** unto others our aspirations (or is it the opposite?).


In politics, voters’ preferences relate to the affordance they invent for themselves in parties ideologies and platforms, candidates, etc. the more aspirations diverge, the more the invention of these affordance will be different between two people. The example of politics raises the question of the agency of politicians in shaping their platform to suit people’s aspirations. In a sense, to actualise their aspiration of being elected (which is linked to other aspirations on social status, income, power, etc.), politicians must provide affordances (or **invites** to take the term used by Irene in reference to Jade’s work) that will hopefully be invented into affordances by voters.

Populism would be defined here as the practice of systematically providing **invites** that suit non-societal aspirations of voters, while politics (by opposition) would be


Affordances can be of two types: limited or unlimited. When we speak of limited affordances, we can use the word “ressource”. Unlimited affordances are also of two types, those which we have to maintain, “commons”, and those that we do not have to maintain, like the wind, and for which I do not have yet a word.

***

# Capabilities

Capabilities reside in the knowledge of a set of practices and gestures, which, together, give the ability to use affordance in order to actualise aspirations. Capabilities are honed over time by individuals in relation to the affordances they find in their environment and the aspirations they have. The acquisition of capabilities can itself be an aspiration. 

One important set of capabilities relating to agency are capabilities that allow to invent aspirations, and those that allow to invent affordances. The capability to “invent" or to perceive affordances is necessary to individuals to actualise their aspirations. Likewise, there are capabilities to invent aspirations from the other capabilities and affordances one has. 

Is there multiple types of capabilities?

Commit message:

Context vs. conditions, aspiration conflicts

manuscript/chapter04.md, after:

***Rough draft — do not cite, do not share***


# Components of the model

This chapter present the conceptual components of the ethics model:
* Aspirations
* Affordances
* Capabilities

I find that in this model, the three notions should be conceived as something that resides within the individual. Aspirations, Affordances and Capabilities I define here only exist in the mind of the individual. Of course, it is possible to discuss and share those with others, but these are of different nature that those I explain below. For example, one could suggest an aspiration or an affordance to someone, but if this second person does not see it as an their own aspiration or affordance, they simply are not. This raises the question on how we can study or event discuss such matters, since they only exist within the self. In the sense, this raises the same question as to the colour or the odour of things. How we know if what we see as blue is the same as what others see as blue? Empathy, again, might be the key. Based on a shared personal experience, we can associate one explanation of aspirations, affordance and capabilities. Those share personal experience also serve in fact to create a bound between individuals. Because we conceive aspirations, affordances and capabilities to be something we can have in common, we become one with others. This could explain why it is easier to “relate” to people with whom we “share” aspirations, even if this does not mean that this person will provide us in any way with an (social) affordance. At least, we can “relate”. Likewise, we relate to those with whom we share capabilities, even though they might be our “competitors”, and we relate with those with whom we share affordances. The sharing of affordances can also introduce competition if these are perceived as resources (affordances that are limited in usage) or cooperation if these are commons (affordances which need maintenance). **The model therefore also not only explains agency, be also how we build social relatedness.**

The **capability** to relate is however honed over time, like **empathy**, **care** and **solicitude**. While these are honed, they are also triggered by **aspirations** and **affordances**. In fact, the **capability** to care fosters **aspiration** for the wellbeing of others, or vice-versa. The model builds on this iterative process between the three components. Hence, the **capability** to care for other will foster the **invention** of **affordances**  to actualise the **aspiration** for their wellbeing, just as the latter will depend on the availability of **affordances** and our **capability** to invent or find those **affordances** in our **environment**.


***

# Aspirations
Aspirations is a universal concept that describes a human reality: desire. From the moment we are born, we desire. The desire not to be exposed to light, the desire for warmth, the desire for food. Of course, only later can we begin conceptualizing, discerning and naming these desires, but this do not mean they do not exist from the moment we come into this world.

With time, our desire multiplies. We start wanting to be held, to be talked to, and to move things. Soon, we want affection, we crave certain food, we want to play with our toys. As we grow older, these aspirations become more abstract, like going to college, traveling, meeting the right person, etc.

While many of our aspirations concerns us, we also desire things for others. We desire our parents to be in good health and that friend to get the job they applied for. Aspirations can, in that sense, be selfless. The people we aspire for can be individuals but also groups. Hence, I can aspire for my students to suceed and find good jobs. I might project these aspirations unto them individually, in accordance to my relationship with each and everyone of them, but I also project these aspiration unto them as a group. Hence, the type of group can be more or less defined. For example, a given group of students is defined, while all students I have is slightly more abstract. I might want for all students — regardless if taught them or not — to succeed. 

While our feeling of desire might be bigger for ourselves and those we love, we also aspire the best for strangers... specific conflicts, society, etc.

Our desire may even apply to non-humans such as pet, or wild life, flora, and the environement. 

In general, aspirations follow two evolutionary paths: one concerns the distance to the self, and the second the degree of abstraction. In [Table 1], I give four examples that illustrate the range of aspirations from basic to abtract and from personal to distant. Unsurprisingly, basic aspirations correspond to those that we develop at an early stage in our life. These also correspond to the “basic needs” such as eating, clothing and shelter. The most basic personal aspirations are somewhat universal. On the other hand, aspirations for distant entities and abstract aspirations vary greatly from one individual to another. 

### Table 1: Aspiration matrix
|          | Basic               | Abstract        |
|----------|---------------------|-----------------|
| Personal | Drinking water      | Going to heaven |
| Distant  | No animal suffering | Sustainability  |

[Table 1]:https://github.com/sjinko/theory/blob/master/manuscript/chapter04.md###chapter04-table01

The distinction between “aspirations”, “desires” and “wants” may seem thin, and it is. The reason why I use aspirations has to do with the seemingly more abstract nature of the notion. We often associate “desire” with a feeling or an uncontrolable urge. Wants are often opposed to needs, making them seem unecessary, superflous or frivolous. Aspiration, on the contrary are associated with greater ideals and with distant future, which may seem odd to speak of a baby’s aspiration to drink their mothers’ milk. Yet, as we will see, a basic and immediate desire and a greater abstract goal can be put on the same level of importance in given circumstances. Moreover, I argue–and this is one of the main point of this book—that we define distant and abstract aspirations through the same process than we define basic and personal ones: by our capabilities on perceived affordances.

## Where aspirations and desire split
Aspirations can be based on desire, but not only. They can also be based on obligation or constraint. For example, one may aspire to a certain status by sense of obligation, or indirectly to fulfil the aspiration of pleasing one’s parents, itself pushed by the aspiration to avoid conflict or feel secure.

The question of conflict should be discussed in details, especially in the context of urban life and governance. What is conflict in the framework of this model? **Conflict**, which should be an integral part of the model, as it is core to ethic. It would seem logic to say that conflict emerges when aspirations differs, when people want different things. But in fact conflict can also emerge when aspirations align. This could be case when capabilities and affordances are not shared, and that the “way” to actualised shared aspirations differs. In fact, most political issues arise not from sharing different aspirations, but honing different capabilities and inventing different affordances. Conflict can also be part of an **aspiration** actualisation process, and therefore embedded in agency. For example, creating conflict between parties can in fact produce affordances needed to actualise one aspirations. Yet, conflict may also emerge when a party does not have the capability to use or invent affordances in the **virtual** **conditions** that would result from the foreseen actualisation of the other’s **perceived** aspirations. In this case, **conflict** would serve to maintain **virtual** **conditions** for this the party can use its **capabilities** and **affordances** to actualise its **aspirations**.

What would be the difference between **aspirations** and **objectives**? Considering what I said about **conflict**, objectives are shared ensemble of **aspirations**, **affordances** and **capabilities**. They need to be shared to make sense, and this sharing entails a degree of **empathy** on each other‘s capabilities and affordances needed to reach these aspirations.


One‘s aspiration cannot be “in conflict” per see. However, the actualisation of certain aspirations may limit the invention of affordances or the honing of capabilities for another aspiration. Hence, when we feel that two or more of our aspirations are “in conflict”, we foresee that the actualisation of one generates **conditions** that **limit** the actualisation of the other. 

What does it mean to **limit** the actualisation of an aspiration? Again, the limitation of an aspiration has perhaps more to do with creating virtual environments since only invented affordances can really be put to use. Therefore, limiting the actualisation of an aspiration is an anticipation in which one is not able to invent affordance or does not hold the capability imagine how they would invent affordances in the future, and consider that this limitation is a transformation of the **environment** by themselves or by others.

This raises the question of what is the difference between **conditions** and **environment**. In short, **conditions** is the configuration of all three dimensions of agency (aspirations, capabilities and affordances), while **environment** only refers to the configuration of perceived affordances, but in relation to the capability and the aspiration of the individuals, since affordances don’t exist on their own!


This means that capabilities are also, in a sense, contextual, in a similar way that **affordances** are contextual (but also, so are aspirations, but more on that later). The model does not entail that capabilities are constantly active. Capabilities “surface” when needed, but otherwise lay dormant.

This prompts me to address the notion of “invites”, in relation to affordances. 


***

## Aspirations are linked
One aspiration may lead to another. If I want to be successful, it might push me to want to make money, therefore have a good job, therefore go to university. Yet, I might also, instead of wanting to have a job, want to make a lot of money without going to university. 

## Building on aspirations
Aspirations can also be built from the bottom up.

## Introducing discrimination
The example of students is a good one because it allows me to introduce some bias. I might want all my students to succeed or all students to suceed, or I may think that only hard-working students should succeed. Instead, I could also aspire for all hard-working and naturally talented students to succeed. Why should students who are naturally gifted and do not have to work hard should fail?

Any aspiration discreminates. When I want something for myself, I want it for me, not for others. If I want something good to happen to my family or to some friends, I don’t wish it necessarily as muhc for other people. I may want the same for everybody, but let‘s just say I don’t care as much. Inversely, I may want something for strangers, but not necessarilly for people that I know. I may consider they don’t deserve it, or that it is no use to them.

## Priorizing aspirations
Not all aspirations are equal. We consider some aspiration of greater importance. Succeeding in life may seem to us more important than going for a burger. 

## Priority is contextual
We may favor one aspiration — say eating something when I am hungry — over another like going for a hike, even though I also want to hike. The way we prioritze aspirations is not absolute, but has to do with context. We would priorize our aspiration to eat if we are starving, over something we deem of greater importance like being true to a friend. Yet, we sometime face these situation where little things take a disproportionate size, as we say. 

## Aspirations depend on context
Let’s say I walk down the street. If the street happens to be by the parc, I may want to stroll thorugh the automn leaves. If on the street there is a store that caugh my eye, I might enter inside and buy something, something I had never thought of.  

## Modeling aspirations
Aspirations are virtual realities.

## Morality / Normative Ethics
Morality is the collectively defined hierarchy of aspirations. Morality help us navigate our aspirations, it’s to get rid of the need to think for ourselves. Hedonism tells us we have to prioritze our bodily aspirations. Utilitarism tells us to prioritize the many aspirations of the most people as possible.

## Guilt
When we go against this priority


***

# Affordances

Affordances allow us to actualise our aspirations by providing us with *material* (physical and ideal) that "does the job"?

To understand the relationship between aspiration and affordances, I might want to to observe practices. For example, if I am wearing a sanitary mask in public, it is to fill several aspirations: protect myself from contamination, obey social norm, conform to a practice that I deem valid. By opposition, I would not want to wear a plexiglas mask because I think it looks stupid, and it would make me stand out in public. Also, I am not sure of their efficiency. Therefore, the sanitary mask allow me to actualise these aspirations, as well as my aspiration to go out and, for example, my aspiration to go buy something. 


The quality of an affordance results of this “trade off” between various aspirations that, in a sense, even define the affordance.

Affordance need to be defined, first by being perceived. In fact, the perception of an affordance is rather its “invention” the same way we “invent” a treasure in French law. The affordance only exist at the moment it is conceived by its user.

Can affordances be perceived by many? Well, since all individuals have different sets of aspirations, the affordance itself may not be perceived collectively but it is possible to recognise that an artefact or a person represents an affordance for some one else. This relates to out capacity for **empathy**, that is to **project** unto others our aspirations (or is it the opposite?).


In politics, voters’ preferences relate to the affordance they invent for themselves in parties ideologies and platforms, candidates, etc. the more aspirations diverge, the more the invention of these affordance will be different between two people. The example of politics raises the question of the agency of politicians in shaping their platform to suit people’s aspirations. In a sense, to actualise their aspiration of being elected (which is linked to other aspirations on social status, income, power, etc.), politicians must provide affordances (or **invites** to take the term used by Irene in reference to Jade’s work) that will hopefully be invented into affordances by voters.

Populism would be defined here as the practice of systematically providing **invites** that suit non-societal aspirations of voters, while politics (by opposition) would be


Affordances can be of two types: limited or unlimited. When we speak of limited affordances, we can use the word “ressource”. Unlimited affordances are also of two types, those which we have to maintain, “commons”, and those that we do not have to maintain, like the wind, and for which I do not have yet a word.

***

# Capabilities

Capabilities reside in the knowledge of a set of practices and gestures, which, together, give the ability to use affordance in order to actualise aspirations. Capabilities are honed over time by individuals in relation to the affordances they find in their environment and the aspirations they have. The acquisition of capabilities can itself be an aspiration. 

One important set of capabilities relating to agency are capabilities that allow to invent aspirations, and those that allow to invent affordances. The capability to “invent" or to perceive affordances is necessary to individuals to actualise their aspirations. Likewise, there are capabilities to invent aspirations from the other capabilities and affordances one has. 

Is there multiple types of capabilities?
